# Introduction

## What is Terraform?

It's an Infrastructure-As-Code tool. It allows for declaratively creating infrastructure on cloud providers, in colos, and even your homelab. There are extensions for practically everything you can think of; if you're missing one (and you know Golang), you can write it.

## What is declarative?

Computer languages generally fall into one of two types - imperative, and declarative. Most are imperative, which means that you explicitly tell the language what to do. With a declarative language, you describe what you want, and it figures out how to get there. That makes it sound fancier and easier than it is; in reality, you have to describe in very specific terms what it is you want.

Terraform is mostly declarative, with some recent nods to imperative programming such as for loops - prior to version 0.12, you had to define the `count` of a resource you wanted instantiated, and it would make `n` copies of it.

# Terraform Basics

## Resources vs. Modules

Broadly speaking, resources specifically instantiate a named resource, like an EC2 instance, or a DNS record, whereas a module generically defines those things - usually with default values assigned - and you can later call them, saving typing. You _can_ define your entire infrastructure solely with resources, but you'll be missing out on a huge advantage of Terraform.

The (redacted) example module creates a Redis instance, a Postgres instance, security groups for both, and a Cloudwatch metric for Redis. Going further, looking at its `variables.tf` file, we see that there are quite a few options - the type and size of storage for the DB, the version of both Redis and Postgres, encryption and snapshot options, and more. For more information on what is required to be passed to the resource, you can consult Terraform's documentation - here is the [Elasticache (Redis) page.](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs/resources/elasticache_replication_group)

## Variables

Anything with a `default` value will pass this into the Terraform module when it's called if it isn't overridden. For example, `aws_db_instance.rds.storage_type` has as its value `var.db_storage_type`, which instructs Terraform to look at the variable `db_storage_type` - it's set to `gp2`, so we don't have to change it. `db_allocated_storage` has as a default `100` (in GiB, which is helpfully displayed as the variable's description), but it's overridden in the calling module to `20`.

You may have noticed that some of the variables defined have `type` set. Terraform is dynamically typed, but much like Python with mypy, allows for static typing if desired.

Locals, seen at the top of `main.tf`, are just that - local variables to that file. They can be anywhere, but historically are placed at the top of the file. They're generally used as seen here, to write out what would otherwise be bulky code with ternaries into something cleaner for later use. They're referenced with `local.varname` instead of `var.varname`.

Terraform underwent a large syntax change between v0.11 and v0.12. In 0.11, all variables were encased in the `"${var.foo}"` syntax you may see scattered around. That has been simplified to `var.foo` or `local.foo`, whichever is correct for the variable. The exception is for string interpolation - using variables along with plaintext (or concatenating strings without the use of the `join` function) requires all variables to be wrapped in `"${}"`. People comfortable with Bash programming will feel at home here.

Modules may also include a `terraform.tfvars` file, which has a `key=value` mapping for variable assignment. These are often used to have production and staging versions of infrastructure.

Variable definition precedence takes the following order, from first to last, with the latest definition standing: env vars --> `terraform.tfvars` --> `-var $foo` on the command line. In general, you'll want to mimic what you see in use in the repository.

## Functions

Terraform includes many built-in functions. One of them seen here is `flatten`. [Here is Terraform's](https://www.terraform.io/language/functions/flatten) documentation on the function, but you may be able to guess that it's flattening lists or lists of lists into a single list. Read through the documentation to get an idea of the rest of them.

## Plans and Applies

This is the main draw of Terraform. When you run `terraform plan`, it looks at the existing infrastructure, compares it to its statefile, and generates a human-readable diff. It also includes things that have changed outside of its scope (for example, if someone manually creates a database using the AWS console), and at the bottom, a summary saying how many entities will be created, changed, and destroyed. You can then save this plan and apply it later - this is what Atlantis does. Additionally, during this time the statefile is locked, so no other changes can be made. This ensures that your expected output is applied with no surprises due to someone else making a change at the same time.

To destroy infrastructure, in general you'll delete the resource/module from the code, and then run a plan. Terraform will detect that it exists in infrastructure but not in code, and generate a plan to destroy it which you can apply. In practice, some resources have protection enabled that prevents destroys. To destroy them, you either have to do two plan/apply cycles (one to remove the deletion protection, and another to destroy the resource), or manually delete it from the AWS console or command line, and then run the plan/apply. You can see this in `main.tf` on L144, with an explanation comment block above it.

Targeted applies (where you specifically instruct Terraform to only affect a specific resource) also exist, but these are rarely needed and shouldn't be relied upon. Similarly, you can import pre-existing resources into the statefile, although the syntax can be a bit confusing, and there are also occasional bizarre gotchas such as needing a region to be hard-coded in the infrastructure code.